Home

Coaching

Cirque Psych

Gallery

Video

About

Contact Me

# Janelle Dinosaurs

Home

Coaching

Cirque Psych

Gallery

Video

About

Contact Me

September 10, 2018

Janelle Peters

#  #notyoga #notstretching - what Contortion is, and isn't.

September 10, 2018

Janelle Peters

Hi All, it's been a minute since I wrote something of length here. However, a
recent conversation with the lovely Joanna Rabon gave me some food for
thought. A lot of people, even fellow circus people, have some
misunderstandings around flexibility, stretching, and contortion. So I wanted
to dispel some myths, point out some distinctions, and start a conversation.
There are a few things I want to address: yoga/contortion,
stretching/contortion, coaching of contortion.

#NOTYOGA

-the inimitable Catie Brier has already made an excellent post by this same title, so please check that out! Here is my personal take, and the way I explain the distinction between contortion and yoga when I'm chatting in real life with students or potential students: Yoga is about the personal, internal experience of the practitioner. It's about how it FEELS in the body, mind, and soul. Yoga is not primarily performative, and is practiced with a goal of improving the mind/body/soul connection. Contortion is a performing art, and it is about the audience's experience viewing the seemingly effortless defiance of what we consider possible for the human body. There is overlap, for sure! I find great physical, mental, and even spiritual satisfaction in training and performing contortion, but MY experience is not the ultimate goal - likewise, some yoga poses take a great deal of flexibility and control, but are still practiced with the yogi(ni)'s experience as the primary goal. 

#NOTSTRETCHING

Okay, this is a slightly finer, but similar, distinction! Stretching and
flexibility training are STILL NOT CONTORTION! This, too, is because of the
ultimate direction/goal. Stretching is a practice used by athletes and
performing artists of all disciplines as a means to an end in their art form.
We stretch to lengthen particular lines of movement in the body. A basketball
player stretches to maintain health and range of movement, but they are not
practicing contortion. A ballerina stretches, and may be very flexible, but
they are not a contortionist, and they're doing stretching-for-ballet, not
contortion. Making sense? Aerialists stretch a LOT (or at least, we should...)
and may do oversplits and deep backbends on our apparatus...but this does not
mean we do contortion. It means we are flexible aerialists.

What IS contortion then?

Contortion is not just being flexible. It is an art in its own right, and
consists of its own extensive set of skills, vocabulary, and techniques.
Originally from Mongolia, the art of contortion generally includes deep front
bends and/or backbends, hand balancing, oversplits, controlled movement
quality, and synchronization of choreography with music. Sometimes, multiple
performers move in synchronicity, or balance on one another. Contortion has
overlap with dance and other acrobatic art forms, but retains its own distinct
characteristics. The most striking characteristic of a contortion act is
always the high level of flexibility on display. It's important to recognize
the achievement that represents, but also to take into account the core
strength, coordination, breath control, and musicality that allow the
flexibility to shine. In order to safely practice and perform contortion, one
needs a coach who can impart all of the listed skills, in the right quantities
and the right order for each individual student.

How to find a safe coach?

Training contortion safely, and properly requires extensive strength, control,
balance, and yes, flexibility. The only safe way to train contortion is to
work with a coach who has also trained contortion with a contortion coach (who
has trained contortion with a contortion coach...). Many of the best
contortionists around have trained with multiple coaches throughout their
career. There is a great deal of nuance that goes into determining which
students are ready to attempt which skills, or even which preparatory drills.
A coach will be able to help you identify your existing strengths, and set
goals that will showcase them, while also bringing your areas of weakness up
to par. If you want to train contortion, I recommend starting with a general
acrobatic flexibility class to build body awareness and passive (and active,
if you have a good flex coach) flexibility. This is a great way to meet
coaches to gauge their experience and how good of a fit they might be for you.
Then begin training individually with an experienced coach, and always be open
to learning from other experienced coaches when possible. Constantly be in
communication with your coach about how your body is responding to the
training! This is key for preventing injury! **Good questions to ask a coach
you are considering** : How long have you been training contortion? Who
were/are your coaches? Tell me about your performing experience in contortion?
What do you do to help your students stay healthy while training contortion?

September 10, 2018

Janelle Peters

### Janelle Peters

Hello from Cirque_Psych!

Getting Instrumental

Back To Top

Powered by Squarespace

